.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii vis.1
.\"
.TH VIS 1 "TYR_VERSION" TYRUTILS

.SH NAME
vis \- Compute visibility (PVS) for a Quake BSP file

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBvis\fP [OPTION]... BSPFILE

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBvis\fP is a tool used in the creation of maps for the game Quake.  vis
looks for a .prt file by stripping the file extension from BSPFILE (if any)
and appending ".prt". vis then calculates the potentially visible set (PVS)
information before updating the .bsp file, overwriting any existing PVS data.

This vis tool supports the PRT2 format for Quake maps with detail brushes. See
the qbsp documentation for details.

Compiling a map (without the -fast parameter) can take a long time, even days
or weeks in extreme cases. Vis will attempt to write a state file every five
minutes so that progress will not be lost in case the computer needs to be
rebooted or an unexpected power outage occurs.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-threads n\fP"
Set number of threads explicitly. By default vis will attempt to detect the
number of CPUs/cores available.
.IP "\fB\-fast\fP"
Skip detailed calculations and calculate a very loose set of PVS
data. Sometimes useful for a quick test while developing a map.
.IP "\fB\-level n\fP"
Select a test level from 0 to 4 for detailed visibility calculations.  Lower
levels are not necessarily faster in in all cases.  It is not recommended that
you change the default level unless you are experiencing problems.  Default 4.
.IP "\fB\-v\fP"
Verbose output.
.IP "\fB\-vv\fP"
Very verbose output.
.IP "\fB\-noambientsky\fP"
Disable ambient sound generation for textures with names beginning with 'SKY'.
.IP "\fB\-noambientwater\fP"
Disable ambient sound generation for textures with names beginning
with '*WATER' or '*04WATER'.
.IP "\fB\-noambientslime\fP"
Disable ambient sound generation for textures with names beginning
with '*SLIME'.
.IP "\fB\-noambientlava\fP"
Disable ambient sound generation for textures with names beginning
with '*LAVA'.
.IP "\fB\-noambient\fP"
Disable all ambient sound generation.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Kevin Shanahan (aka Tyrann)
.br
Based on source provided by id Software
.br
http://disenchant.net
.br

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please send bug reports to tyrann@disenchant.net.
.br
Improvements to the documentation are welcome and encouraged.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2013 Kevin Shanahan
.br
Copyright (C) 1997 id Software
.br
License GPLv2+:  GNU GPL version 2 or later
.br
<http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl2.html>.
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.  There is
NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBqbsp\fP(1)
\fBlight\fP(1)
\fBbspinfo\fP(1)
\fBbsputil\fP(1)
\fBquake\fP(6)
